after this comment. Okay.
I'm trying to find the details of how I brought this
to the board. Okay.
I told the board I'll make every effort I can to work
with President Miller in an amicable situation.
I went to Jarvis and told him that.
I subsequently
made a trip
by air to every board member's location. That was
when I took to each of them this reorganization
plan. And it was at that time that I picked up the
strong sentiment in the direction that I'm
talking about.
I came back and was asked how I had come out in my
efforts to work amicably, and I indicated that I
didn't think it was working. I was getting signals
which I thought were authentic. that in his staff
meetings and on other occasions he would blast the
chancellor's office openly, disparagingly,
what's the word? Disparagingly,
I think. That's what I came out with, but it didn't
feel right, but in a negative way.
So
they said, well, okay. They called in separately
to meet with them in executive session in my
absence, Perry Atkinson and Fred Benson, to ask
them if they thought this reorganization plan was
workable.
I don't know how Perry reacted to it. The strong
agriculturalist
in him, I think, he had some reservations about it.
I believe Benson supported it wholeheartedly,
saying it probably was a good idea.
At any rate,
When I got back and went to the board, made
the recommendation for.
No.
One member of the board. Said
we shouldn't leave this thing to Frank. To take the
entire onus of. We've got to carry a part of the
burden ourselves. I hereby recommend that we
terminate the services of President Miller.
Period. It was seconded. And I said, gentlemen,
before you vote on this motion, let me make a
comment, if you will.
Let's reassign this gentleman. Let's not
terminate him. We have previously gotten
ourselves into trouble by terminating a person, a
tenured person. I looked into the tenure. I had
earlier looked into the tenure of President
Miller. He was tenured, but the tenure never
originated from the department, was not reviewed
by the department.
I don't know how it could have happened, but
apparently President Miller took it to the board
for him to have tenure. Or some board member
offered it to the board. I'm not sure. But he was
tenured. And I told the board, let's not play the
game again of getting ourselves in trouble over a
tenure matter, if you will. reassign him to the
chancellor's office and I'll take care of it from
there. So they made that motion and it passed.
After that, we talked about a successor, an
interim successor. I was asked to name two or three
people. I named Harry Kunkel and Charles Sampson.
Charles Sampson, mainly because of my experience
with him, on the board of directors of the Bank of
A&M. I thought he was a good board member.
It was probably the weakest decision I ever made,
Haskell. It wasn't a good decision at all. And I
wasn't aware that it wouldn't be. But when I named
those two names, one board member said, well,
we've had agriculturalists for some time. Let's
try an engineer.
So that's how Chuck got in on an interim basis. And
that was on a Wednesday afternoon? I don't know. It
was a... Was this the same day that Jarvis was
called over and told of the decision that he... No.
I don't think Jarvis was ever called over and given
by the board advance notice that this was going to
happen. Oh, no, no, no. But I was thinking of the day
that he was told it had happened, that as of this
point you are no longer the president. No, no. It
happened right in his presence. He was at the board
meeting, and the board called him in after the
executive session and said, President Miller, we
are reassigning you. Now, that happened on a
Wednesday. because you and I chatted in your
office on Tuesday morning as I was saying goodbye,
thank you for all that you've meant to me from the
seventh grade through the 12th grade, and then as
dean, and you asked me, because you really caught
my attention, you said, who are the five best
department heads on the campus, as I was ready to
leave. I said, huh? And then you said, start with
engineering. And so I mentioned Charlie Holland.
And you said, well, what about Chuck Sampson? And I
said, well, he's not a department head. You asked
me why. And I didn't want to tell you that a number of
the senior faculty had gone to Benson to say,
Chuck's really not leading us as well now as he was.
I didn't want to. All right, I go back and I told Mac
that, and I said, Mac, I think I know who the new vice
chancellor for engineering at the system level
might be, because we'd heard a rumor that there
might be a vice chancellor for engineering and a
vice chancellor for agriculture, Adkisson being
one of them. And that was on Tuesday, and then
Jarvis is... The decision is made on Wednesday...
And I hear about it that night in the wee hours in El
Paso.
You want to quit for today? Yeah, that's a good
time.
Okay, we're checking to be sure that this is
working. Transcriber, this is, I believe, the
11th of May. I mean, 11th of April, and when we
transcribe it, we will just indicate that these
interviews were done on three days. Check yours,
Dr. Hubert. Okay, and this is the third day, and
we're starting at about almost 10 o'clock.
Let's see, chronologically, when we quit, you
were the chancellor. We're into the 1980s, and...
Dr. Sampson served as the interim president for a
year and then searched for a new A&M president. Can
you summarize that search and how the selection of
Dr. Vandiver came about? Yes, we advertised
nationally, received a number of applications,
Vandiver was not one of them, and proceeded with
the search in the customary fashion, narrowed it
down to a few people and had interviews with them.
Really never did find the zinger that turned the
board on and the search committee. The board had
appointed a search committee also. During the
course of this search, the local newspaper, the
Eagle, pushed and pushed for lists of candidates,
the short list, and wanted to know all of the
procedures that were going on and such. The board
had decided we would not release this
information. And I stood by that. And as a
consequence, I personally was
challenged in the courts by the EGLE for not
releasing the names of the applicants and the
short list and so on. And as you might know, the
eagle prevailed. The court ruled in favor of the
eagle. A&M, Mr. Hubert, you've got to release
these names and release them now. And, of course,
we did in compliance with the court order.
We had also a...
a professional search firm out of Dallas who was
giving us names of individuals. And
we really didn't get a lot of help from them.
They were more helpful later on in the search for a
chancellor for my replacement when I retired. But
back to the course,
the
selection finally just almost came to a halt.
The board didn't really feel comfortable
strongly about any of the applicants or
candidates.
Frank Vandiver came into the picture as a
consequence of
my suggesting his name as a potential candidate
and another board member I think it was John
Blocker of Houston supporting it strongly. And he
was invited to submit his credentials. He was then
at North Texas State University as president. He
did submit his credentials.
The
board had a meeting in Dallas at which time we
invited Mr. Vandiver to come down from Denton and
spend several hours with us. He did. And as a result
of that meeting, he was selected as president.
And that started the Vandiver years. I think
Vandiver's great accomplishments were in the
realm of improving faculty relationships with
the administration and in removing A&M's name
from the black list of the American Association of
University Professors. Frank, I think almost
single-handedly in several trips to AAUP
headquarters and visiting with them was able to
have A&M cleared of any problems with AAUP. Now,
what was the next part? All right, and you
and he worked together for about how long before
your retirement? Don't recall. I don't recall
that timeline. You retired when? I retired in
July the 1st, 82. What were, as you... were
approaching that date, what were your feelings
about your career at A&M? Oh, they were so strongly
positive, Haskell. I felt what a good fortune had
fallen upon me when I came to A&M. It was a moment in
time where A&M was ready to move forward And I was
happy to be swept up into the momentum of that
movement and all of the subsequent events and
happenings that took place, the venture study,
the aspiration study, the implementation of
those studies, the reorganization of the
university from a
four degree granting segments to what, now 10 or
11. And simply the opportunity to be a part of that
renaissance at Texas A&M was just absolutely
exhilarating. And surprisingly, to close out my
A&M career after serving in three deanships, each
for about a period of six years. I was a dean total 20
years in three different colleges. to have the
opportunity to move into the chancellor's office
and succeed Jack Williams, albeit there was an
interim in between, was absolutely a thrilling
capstone to the A&M career. Some of the key people
that you associated with, can you
kind of describe their ability? Tom Cherry. Tom
was very astute, outstanding, low profile, low
key in his position, former experience in the
business affairs of one of the major airlines.
I've forgotten which one it was now. I want to say
TWA. But nonetheless, Tom brought a good
stability to the president's office. And I
think...
was good for President Rudder. Clyde Freeman.
Clyde is an exceptionally astute business and
finance person. I think he knew more about the
permanent university fund and the available fund
than anyone in our sector of the state. He was...
He was
a man filled with massive amounts of information,
financial information.
Historically, he was,
from the historical perspective of the financial
affairs of the university and the system, he was
without a peer. He could recite a decade ago, two
decades ago, and give you time, place, date, who,
where, when, how, and why, that kind of a fellow, a
big help.
General Peel, the vice chancellor for physical
facilities and construction, had come to the
university system
two or three years prior to my coming on the scene
there. And he had a rich experience in the
military. He was a, I think, a major or lieutenant,
I guess a major general with the engineering corps
of the armed forces. had handled massive
construction projects before and was capable of
working with a multi, multi-million dollar
construction budget, overseeing everything
that went on from the planning stages to the final
completion. Just an outstanding talent.
When you needed advice, to
whom, I'm not going to ask you the negative, only
the positive, to whom did you turn for advice and
counsel first?
I think it would be Clyde Freeman Haskell that I
would visit with. He was always knowledgeable
about board affairs and board matters. And
although he did not have the background in
academics,
He had been associated with them sufficiently
that he had a good insight into a proper course to
follow, or questions to ask. And he was helpful all
along. I would say particularly in budget matters
and in preparation of materials for submission to
the legislature. Bob Cherry
was exceedingly helpful in legislative matters.
Bob had earned the high respect of the people in
Austin in the legislature as an adroit
politician, lobbyist, spokesman for Texas A&M
University and the system, and he was highly
regarded by members of both the legislature and
the Senate. He was helpful in
reviewing the presentations I made to the various
legislation hearing groups, the budget
committees and so forth, and making suggestions
for strengthening them. And he was a good help.
When you went to Austin for court and board and or
legislature, who were your key aides in those
efforts? Politicians and or staff?
I, Haskell, strangely enough, on those
occasions,
I traveled alone. But did you have anyone that
would be your ally, key ally in your... Well, Bob
Cherry was there present all the time. I felt that
if I got into a ditch... or into a quandary about
some issue or some question that was directed at
me, I could turn to Bob for help. Clyde Freeman was
usually along and I could get help from him. Did we
have a system person in Austin pretty permanently
during the legislative session? Not during my
time, except during the latter years The purchase
of the old. What's the name? Oh,
that house in Austin, the house in Austin. Begins
with an H. It was it was to be headquarters for a
permanent residence in Austin. Oh John
Hutchison. Was moved to Austin. Bob asked for an
assistant to help him with legislative matters.
During my term as chancellor,
the board approved it, and during the session,
John Hutchison would move to Austin and stay there
on site. He didn't stay annually. He had come back
at the close of the session, and he was a big help to
Bob. Which legislators were A&M's best allies?
Bill Moore, of course, in the Senate as chairman of
the Finance Committee. Bill or anyone else who
held that position could wield a lot of
influence. In the house, there was a chap from up in
the plains of Texas. I'm trying to remember his
name. who was such a strong supporter, and he had a
good, long tenure as a House of Representatives
member. Not Heatley, was it? No, no. No. I don't
think Heatley was a great supporter of Texas A&M.
That's what I was going to be surprised. No,
Heatley was not friendly to us. Because Dr.
Williams used to call him S.O.B. Heatley, Sweet
Old Bill.
Heatley, I think, was from the Plains, too.
Paducah. And he was essentially a Texas Tech man.
Oh, he wanted a college of veterinary medicine at
Tech.
Now, let's see, some other key people that we want
to be sure we touch on. One is Lloyd Heaton, a kind of
a campus
leader forever. Describe Lloyd Heaton and his
characteristics.
I think it's unusual in an institution for the
registrar of that institution to evolve to such a
place of recognition that Lloyd Heaton held.
Lloyd was a kind, gentle, soft-spoken individual
who was
a member of all of the key committees. President
Rutter, and he may have had this spot before
President Rutter, I don't know, But at least with
President Rutter, he was secretary of the
executive committee. He was a member of the
academic council. And Lloyd was, I think,
important more for the information which he had
and which he didn't talk about than for any other
reason. Lloyd kept the minutes for the executive
committee, and I think possibly for the academic
council, as I recall.
I don't remember so well the minutes of the
academic council, but I do know that in the minutes
for the executive committee, I was somewhat
frustrated when I reviewed them at the end of a
meeting The minutes never revealed who made a
motion or who seconded it and what the vote was. It
would simply indicate that a motion to do such and
such was passed, period.
Well, that told the essence of the story. But from
the standpoint of building a history for an
institution, it told very little about who did
what and who supported and endorsed what. That
seemed to be typical of many records at A&M.
They didn't give the They didn't give the details
of the action taken and the background for it. But
Lloyd was the secretary of the academic council
and the executive committee, and it was in that
context that I knew him best. Also, occasionally
I'd have I'd have cause to call upon him for help
with some set of records or data and such. He was
always willing to supply them and in good time.
Transcriber, this is an editor's note that we will
identify as editor's note. I have heard the story
that Lloyd Heaton has said a number of times,
quote, over my dead body will we ever have black
students at Texas A&M, period, end quote. I also
understand that just before the first black
students enrolled, Mr. Rutter, having made that
arrangement with great skill, called Mr. Heaton
and told him to review the transcripts to be sure
that each of those students was enrolled in the
appropriate course in the appropriate section
and that he, Lloyd Heaton, was to call each
instructor of each of those sections to let them
know that when they went to class the next day,
there would be black students there, they had been
duly admitted and enrolled, and that this was a
call to be sure that there would be no problem and no
misunderstanding. And as a result of that, the
enrollment and attendance of the first black
students could not have gone more smoothly. And
Mr. Heaton carried out that assignment, as far as I
recall, superbly. His commanding officer,
President Rutter, had given him a direction and he
followed it. End of note. When you became, who were
your key staff officers in the, who were your key
staff in your office when you became chancellor?
When I became chancellor? Who were the key office
people? You didn't take Peggy Ritchie with you, I
don't think, did you? No. I didn't take Peggy with
me, nor did I take Brian Cole with me. And the reason
was that in Peggy's case, twofold. I knew that
going to the chancellor's office was...